extreme routines are very popular in the
Health Fitness and biohacking world and
while they can be a great source of
inspiration they're unrealistic for most
of us with the constraints that come
with a normal life like limited time
attention and money and you know even if
we wanted to most of us just can't
practically run a marathon every day
before work or do the perfect sauna and
cold dunk routine or weekly IV drips of
hardto pronounce longevity compounds or
the perfect supplement routine if you
can do those things that's awesome go
for it and enjoy but these things just
aren't practical for everyone and they
aren't necessary for good health and
while some of these extreme routines
certainly are inspiring and there is
definitely utility in that the truth is
that the threshold required to be very
healthy and very fit isn't extreme at
all it's within the capability of the
average person facing those average
constraints of limited time attention
and money yes it takes practice and yes
you have to work hard and be consistent
but but the effort in complexity isn't
even close to what is trending in the
popular culture which really seems to be
a constantly escalating standard more
focused on outdoing itself than giving
us practical advice and the truth is you
don't need a million different protocols
to be healthy and you don't need
superhuman discipline to be fit you just
need to establish some good habits
around a few important things the most
important things the things that have
always been the most important Good Food
daily exercise spending some time with
your family and friends getting Outdoors
getting some fresh air and some sun
having fun laughing having a purpose
whatever expression that might take for
you the everyday seemingly humble parts
of our Lives the power of which cannot
be bottled or replicated and another one
of those Cosmic paradoxes that is worth
paying attention to it's the little
things that have the greatest impact
those are the things that are at the
absolute core of good health and Fitness
it's not in Blue Light blocking glasses
and IV drips not that those things don't
work but if you're trying to be healthy
but you're mostly sedentary and your
diet is mostly processed food and most
of your weaking calories come from
alcohol you aren't in the need of
biohacking or a professional athletes
fitness program you just need to be
consistent with the basics don't let
complicated biohacking protocols or
extreme fitness routines convince you
that good health and fitness are
unattainable for you those things
certainly have their place but they're
not a substitute for the little simple
things that make the biggest difference
but if you feel like you're struggling
to get those basics in place you build
them with the same Universal principles
that you build anything else start small
with what you can sustain no matter how
seemingly insignificant that is and then
slowly build from there always keeping
the bigger picture in mind which is to
build something that is meant to last
and something that will support your
life and add enjoyment to it not consume
it do that and you're probably going to
be just fine I hope that makes sense if
you guys have any questions let me know
thanks for watching and I'll see you
next
time