welcome to the huberman Lab podcast
where we discuss science and
science-based tools for everyday life
I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor
of neurobiology and Ophthalmology at
Stanford school of medicine today we are
discussing Fitness Fitness of course is
vitally important for cardiovascular
health for strength for endurance for
lifespan for health span I can't think
of anyone out there that wouldn't want
to have healthy hormonal function
healthy cardiovascular function to live
a long time and to feel vital that is to
have a long Health span as well as a
long lifespan Fitness and fitness
Protocols are tremendously powerful for
developing all of that however despite
there being an enormous amount of
information out there on the internet
and in books and elsewhere it can be a
bit overwhelming so today's episode is
really designed to synthesize
science-based tools that we've covered
on the podcast some with expert guests
like Dr Andy Galpin or Dr Peter attia or
world-renowned movement specialist Edo
portal or physiotherapists and strength
and conditioning Coach Jeff Cavalier
we've had all of them as guests on the
podcast and each and every one of them
provided a wealth of knowledge in terms
of the various things that you can do to
optimize very specific or multiple
aspects of Fitness today we're going to
do something a little bit different than
usual typically on the huberman Lab
podcast I offer mechanism up front or
first and then we talk about protocols
that you can use that really lean on
those science and science-based
mechanisms today I'm going to describe a
specific protocol that serves as a
general template that anyone in fact
everyone can use in order to maximize
all aspects of Fitness so that includes
endurance strength flexibility
hypertrophy aesthetic changes Etc
however this General framework can also
be modified that is customized to your
particular needs so if you're somebody
who really wants to build more strength
or bigger muscles you can change the
protocol and the overall program
according to that and I'll talk about
very specific ways to do that or if
you're somebody who really just wants to
maintain strength but you want to build
endurance we'll talk about that and of
course we will cover real life issues
such as should you train if you are
sleep deprived what about food when
should you eat what if you haven't eaten
and you're hungry should you still train
etc etc we're going to cover all of that
again in the context of this what I
would call foundational template of
Fitness this foundational template of
Fitness is something that I personally
use in fact I've used it for over three
decades hard to believe that I'm not old
but I just recently turned 47 and I
still use this basic protocol or
template across the week and modify it
according to what my particular goals
are that year that month even that day
because I like you live in the real
world and sometimes I I've been
traveling or I miss a workout yes it
does happen or life isn't organizing
exactly the way that I need to in order
to have everything go according to the
protocol that's on paper so we're going
to discuss real world issues and how to
work with the real world issues in order
to get the most out of your fitness
program and again by the end of today's
program I can assure you you will have a
template protocol that you can build up
from build out change and modify and
that will really serve your fitness
goals according to the science and what
peer-reviewed studies and the experts
that appeared on this podcast and other
podcasts really tell us is best and
optimal for our fitness I'm pleased to
announce that the huberman Lab podcast
has now launched a premium channel I
want to be very clear that the huberman
Lab podcast will continue to be released
every Monday at zero cost to Consumer
and there will be no change in the
format of these podcasts the premium
channel is a response to the many
questions we get about specific topics
and it will allow me to really drill
deep into specific answers related to
the those topics so once a month I'm
going to host and ask me anything
so-called AMA where you can ask me
anything about specific topics covered
on the huberman Lab podcast and I will
answer those questions those of course
will be recorded there will also be
other premium content available to
premium subscribers such as transcripts
and short videos of new tools and unique
tools for mental health physical health
and performance if you want to check out
the premium channel you can go to
hubermanlab.com premium there is a 10 a
month charge or a hundred dollars per
year and I should mention that a large
portion of the proceeds from the Hebrew
lab premium channel will go to support
scientific research that develops the
very sorts of tools that we talk about
on the huberman Lab podcast the rest of
the support for the Hebron Lab podcast
premium channel will go to supporting
the regular huberman Lab podcast again
that's hubermanlab.com premium before we
dive into today's content about Fitness
and fitness protocols I want to tell you
about a brand new study that is very
exciting and frankly very unusual
this is a study that was published out
of the University of Houston examining a
what I would call a micro exercise or a
micro movement it's a very small
movement of a very small
portion of your body in fact just one
percent of your musculature that when
it's performed continuously while seated
has at least what they report are very
dramatic positive changes in terms of
blood sugar utilization and metabolism
so the title of this study is a potent
physiological method to magnify and
sustain Soleus oxidative metabolism
improves glucose and lipid regulation
this study was published in eye science
and as I mentioned earlier it is getting
a lot of attention and it's very unusual
without going into all the details of
the study let me just briefly give you a
little bit of the background first of
all you have a muscle called the Soleus
the soleus muscle is a more or less wide
flat muscle that sits beneath what most
people think of as their calf although
it's part of the calf muscle the other
portion of the calf is called the
gastrocnemius the Soleus sits below that
now the soleus muscle is a unique muscle
because it's largely slow twitch muscle
fibers it's designed to be used
continuously over and over again for
stabilizing your body when you're
standing upright
for walking this is a muscle that's
designed to contract over and over and
over again in fact you could walk all
day on this muscle and most likely it
would not get sore
you've probably done that and it did not
get sore in contrast a muscle like your
bicep or your tricep if I were to have
you perform hundreds or thousands of
repetitions even with a very light
weight you know one pound weight or a
two pound weight eventually it would
fatigue you would feel it sort of a burn
there it's a very unusual set of muscles
to use repeatedly but the Soleus is an
unusual muscle in that it really is
designed to be used continuously now
this study was focused on how people who
sit a lot of the day and don't have the
opportunity for a lot of physical
movement or maybe who don't even
exercise at all
can improve their metabolism and glucose
utilization without going into a deep
dive about glucose utilization because
we've done the Deep dive on this podcast
on episodes such as metabolism Etc you
can look those up at huberinlab.com
they're all time stamped and available
there anytime you eat your blood sugar
goes up to some extent so your blood
glucose as it's called goes up to some
extent and then insulin is a hormone
that's used to essentially chaperone and
sequester and use that blood glucose or
it's basically the idea is you don't
want blood glucose to go too high
hyperinsulinemia is something associated
with blood glucose that's too high
because insulin goes up to essentially
match the level of blood glucose you
also don't want to be hypoglycemic you
don't want to have blood sugar
that's too low and insulin is involved
in both regulating Peaks and troughs in
blood sugar blood glucose so we can
basically say and this is very simple
but we can basically say that you don't
want blood glucose to be elevated too
much or for too long that's not good in
fact people who have diabetes because
they don't make insulin people with type
1 diabetes do not make insulin at all
their blood glucose is so high that they
actually have to take insulin in order
to regulate it otherwise their blood
glucose can go so high that it can
damage cells and damage organs it can
even kill people
people have type 2 diabetes are
so-called insulin insensitive they make
insulin but the receptors to insulin are
not sensitive to it and so they make
more insulin than normally would be made
and blood glucose doesn't regulated
properly et cetera Etc
the take-home message about blood
glucose is that you want your blood
glucose levels to go up when you eat but
not too high and you don't want them to
stay elevated for too long this study
looked at how people who are largely
sedentary or at least sitting
can increase the utilization the
clearance of glucose from the
bloodstream after eating and they also
looked at overall metabolism for people
get this that we're using just that one
percent of muscle the Soleus by doing
what they call a Soleus push-up so the
Soleus push-up can be described very
simply as if you're sitting down with
your knee bent at an approximately right
angle
like a square corner and pushing up or I
should say lifting your heel while
pushing down on your toe and Contracting
the calf muscle as it were and then
lowering the heel and then in lifting
that heel again lowering the heel
lifting the heel again each one of those
is what they call a Soleus push-up
this study had people continuously do
Soleus push-ups
and they looked at things like blood
glucose utilization they looked at
metabolism and so on now a couple of
important things about the study before
I tell you what they discovered which
was frankly pretty miraculous almost
hard to believe and yet I believe the
data the data look to be collected quite
um quite well and there are a lot of
statistics and the study looks to be
quite thorough first of all they used an
equal number of male and female subjects
there were a wide range of body mass
indices okay so this wasn't just super
fit people or people that were purely
sedentary and not fit they used a wide
variety of Ages time of day people who
tended to walk a lot or not walk a lot
they measured changes in metabolism and
blood glucose utilization in people that
had done these Soleus push-ups while
seated in the laboratory and I must say
they had them do these solely's push-ups
for quite a long while continuously so
they had them do it for as long as 270
minutes total throughout the day so if
you divide that that's four and a half
hours you might say well four and a half
hours of lifting the heel and putting
the heel down lifting the heel putting
the heel down that's a lot but they
didn't always do it continuously they
had some breaks in there so this is the
sort of thing that you could imagine you
or other people could do while seated
while doing zooms or uh while on calls
or maybe even while eating doing that
sort of thing although I'm not
suggesting that you constantly be
focusing on Soleus push-ups throughout
your life the point is that people who
did these Soleus push-ups experienced
dramatic improvements in blood sugar
regulation and in metabolism despite the
fact that the Soleus is just one percent
of the total musculature so here I'm
going to read from the abstract about
what they found people who did these
Soleus push-ups
despite
being a tiny muscle and using very
little local energy in fact they
measured muscle glycogen the burn or
essentially the the utilization of fuel
within the muscle and there was very
little utilization of fuel within the
Soleus itself and that's because the
soles has this unique property of
needing to basically keep you going all
day walking all day or moving all day
what they saw was a large magnitude
for example 52 percent less
post-prandial that's after a meal
glucose Excursion so 52 percent less
increase in blood glucose and sixty
percent six zero less hyperinsulinemia
so reduced levels of insulin they also
miraculously observe that despite this
being again a small muscle one percent
of the total muscle mass so very small
oxidative use they saw big improvements
in systemic metabolic regulation so this
is interesting and I think something
that we should at least know about I'm
not aware that anyone's replicated this
study yet I know there's a ton of
excitement about this study in the
popular press and if the data turn out
to hold up which I like to imagine they
will I can understand why there's so
much excitement what this means is that
if you're somebody who cares about blood
glucose regulation you want to keep your
metabolism running
please don't stop exercising the other
ways that you exercise but if you're
somebody who wants to maximize your
health doing these Soleus push-ups
fairly continuously while seated is
going to be beneficial
and in addition to that I know that
there are going to be people out there
who for instance might be injured or
you're traveling and you're stuck on a
plane or you're in the classroom and
you're forced to study all day or take
notes all day you're just not getting
enough opportunity to get those steps
that you want to take whether or not
it's 10 000 or fewer or more getting
enough steps or movement maybe you don't
have time to get out and do your run or
maybe you're also running weight lifting
and doing yoga classes and things of
that sort but you want to further
improve your Fitness at least in terms
of your metabolic Health this seems like
a terrific very low investment way to do
it certainly zero cost it does take a
little bit of attention so you have to
divert your attention from other things
you're doing to make sure that you're
still doing these Soleus push-ups I'm
sure that many of you are going to have
a lot of detailed questions such as you
know how high did they lift the heel and
did they contract the muscle very hard
or not
couple of things about that they did not
have subjects really contract the muscle
hard they did measure the angle of heel
rays and it was anywhere from 10 to 15
degrees so they didn't have to go way
way up on their tippy toes or things of
that sort
in any event
270 minutes four and a half hours of
doing these uh Soleus push-ups is a lot
but by my read of the data and the
rather significant or I should say very
significant effects that they observed
on blood glucose regulation and
Metabolism Etc seems to me that doing
less would still be beneficial and that
you don't necessarily have to do the
full 270 minutes in order to get the
benefits that they observed
more about the study includes the fact
that the benefits they observed were
very long lasting as long as two hours
after a meal they could still see this
improved blood glucose utilization I
don't know because I wasn't able to find
it in the methods whether or not they
were doing the Soleus push-ups while
they were consuming um blood sugar in
this study
the point being that if you're somebody
who cares about their Fitness this study
is interesting because what it means is
that again if you are forced to be
immobile or sitting longer than you
would like
I feel stuck in a meeting or zooms or
class or on a plane Etc
or if you're simply trying to add a bit
more Fitness and metabolic Health to
your overall regimen Soleus push-ups at
least to me seem like a very low
investment simple zero cost tool to
improve your metabolic health for those
of you that want to peruse the study in
more detail we will provide a link to
this paper published in eye science in
the show note caption before we begin
I'd like to emphasize that this podcast
is separate from my teaching and
research roles at Stanford it is however
part of my desire and effort to bring
zero cost to Consumer information about
science and science related tools to the
general public in keeping with that
theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of
today's podcast our first sponsor is
inside tracker inside tracker is a
personalized nutrition platform that
analyzes data from your blood and DNA to
help you better understand your body and
help you meet your health goals now I've
long been a believer in getting regular
blood work done for the simple reason
that many of the factors that impact
your immediate and long-term Health can
only be analyzed from a quality blood
test one issue with a lot of blood tests
and DNA tests out there however is that
you get information back about hormones
blood lipids Etc but you don't know what
to do with that information inside
tracker makes understanding all of that
very easy and even better points to
specific directives that is things you
can do in terms of your lifestyle your
nutrition supplementation Etc in order
to bring those numbers related to
metabolic factors lipids hormones Etc
into the ranges that are optimal for you
your immediate and long-term Health if
you'd like to try inside tracker you can
go to inside tracker.com huberman to get
20 off any of inside trackers plans
that's inside tracker.com huberman to
get 20 off today's episode is also
brought To Us by Roca Roca makes
eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of
the absolute highest quality the company
was founded by two All-American swimmers
from Stanford and everything about Roka
eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed
with performance in mind I've spent a
lifetime working on the visual system
and I can tell you that your visual
system has to contend with an enormous
number of challenges in order for you to
be able to see clearly Roca understands
this and has designed their sunglasses
and Eyeglasses to be worn in any number
of different conditions and for you to
still be able to see with Crystal
clarity now I wear eyeglasses at night
when I work or when I drive and I wear
sunglasses during the day I don't wear
sunglasses when I get my morning
sunlight viewing a practice that I'm
absolutely religious about every single
morning but throughout the day I'll wear
sunglasses when I drive or if I'm
heading into bright sunlight to protect
my eyes Roca eyeglasses and sunglasses
are terrific because they were designed
for performance so they were designed
for things like cycling and running so
they won't slip off your face if they
get sweaty they're extremely lightweight
in fact most of the time I can't even
remember that they're on my face they're
so lightweight however they also can be
worn anywhere to work to dinner Etc they
have a terrific Aesthetics unlike a lot
of other performance eyeglasses out
there you can only find in designs that
really make people look like a cyborg
Roka makes the cyborg versions some
people like those but they also make
versions of their eyeglasses and
sunglasses with frames that you can wear
out to dinner to work etc if you'd like
to try Roca eyeglasses and sunglasses go
to roca.com that's roka.com and enter
the code huberman to save 20 off your
first order again that's Roca roka.com
and enter the code huberman at checkout
today's episode is also brought To Us by
Helix sleep Helix sleep makes mattresses
and pillows that are customized to your
unique sleep needs now sleep is the
fundamental layer that is the most
important aspect of mental health
physical health and performance I've
said that before on this podcast and I'm
going to be saying it over and over
again if you're sleeping well everything
else is better and if you're not
sleeping well everything else gets far
worse so sleep is vital and sleeping on
the correct mattress is absolutely vital
Helix understands this and they have a
brief quiz that you can take so you
simply go to their website you take this
quiz ask you questions such as you tend
to run hot or cold during the night you
tend to sleep on your back your side of
your stomach or maybe you don't know and
they match you to a mattress that's
ideal for your particular sleep needs
for me that was the dusk mattress dusk
I've been sleeping on a dusk mattress
for well over a year now and it's the
best sleep I've ever had if you'd like
to try a helix mattress you can go to
helixsleep.com huberman take that brief
two minute sleep quiz and they'll match
you to a customized mattress for your
sleep needs you'll get up to 200 off all
mattress orders and two free pillows
again if you're interested you go to
helixsleep.com huberman for up to 200
off and two free pillows the huberman
Lab podcast is now partnered with
momentous supplements to find the
supplements we discuss on the huberman
Lab podcast you can go to live momentous
spelled ous live momentous.com huberman
and I should just mention that the
library of those supplements is
constantly expanding again that's
livemomentous.com huberman let's talk
about Fitness and let's talk about how
you can develop the optimal Fitness
protocols for you so that includes what
to do each day of the week and your
Fitness protocol across the week and
indeed across the month and the year and
even year to year when we had Dr Andy
Galpin on the podcast he said something
very important that we want to keep in
mind today which is concepts are few
methods are many that is there are an
infinite number of different programs
and exercises and set and rep schemes
and different runs and burpees and
push-ups etc etc that one can follow
however there are really just a few
basic concepts or principles of muscle
physiology of cardiovascular function of
connective tissue function that provide
or set the basis for the adaptations
that we call Fitness or that lead to
Fitness so I'm going to list those off
now we can talk about a fitness protocol
that's really aimed mainly toward
developing skill that's one or speed
that's another or power which is speed
time strength or specifically strength
or hypertrophy growth of muscles or
endurance such as muscular endurance
muscular endurance is for instance your
ability to stay in a plank position or
to do a wall sit you know to sit on an
invisible chair against a wall
or other forms of endurance like near
pure anaerobic endurance so a one minute
Sprint or less or a one minute all out
cycling on a stationary bike this sort
of thing or endurance that occurs in the
kind of three to twelve minute total
duration range so that might be
Sprints or high intensity interval type
training it could be a all-out swim it
could be all out row
that's another form of endurance Taps
into different fuel systems different
aspects of muscle physiology Etc and
then endurance that lasts 30 minutes or
more which is typically what people
think about when they think about
endurance but of course the other forms
of endurance matter so we've got skill
speed power strength hypertrophy
muscular endurance anaerobic endurance
what I would call three to twelve minute
endurance although it goes by other
names as well and 30 minutes or more
endurance type exercise and adaptations
each and every one of these
requires different principles different
concepts in order to improve
say your muscular strength or your
hypertrophy or both however there's a
general theme that sits beneath all
adaptations leading to Fitness and
that's what we're really going to set
down as the base layer the foundation of
everything we talk about today and
that's that we need to think about what
are the modifiable variables again I'm
borrowing directly from the episode with
Dr Andy Galpin he was the one that said
modifiable variables are the key thing
to think about what are you going to
modify what are you going to change in
order to increase one or sum of the
various things I listed off before skill
speed power strength hypertrophy
endurance etc etc and some of the key
Concepts that emerge from that
discussion are that we need to think
about Progressive overload normally when
people hear about Progressive overload
they think about adding more weight to a
bar or picking up heavier dumbbells but
that could also be Progressive overload
in the context of running up a hill of
steeper incline or running a little bit
faster or a little bit further and so on
and so forth now as I promised earlier
today we are not going to drill into
each and every one of the mechanisms
that underlie the different adaptations
that are going to develop speed and
strength and endurance Etc because that
was covered in the podcast with Dr Andy
Galpin and the other podcast with
experts that I mentioned earlier and we
again will provide links to those
podcasts if you want to drill into those
mechanisms instead what we're going to
do is we're going to start with a
program that essentially is designed for
you to maximize all aspects of Fitness
to the extent that you can
simultaneously maximize all aspects of
Fitness but then to change or modify
that protocol so that if you want to
build up more for instance strength and
you want to just hold on to the
endurance you have
you don't want to build endurance at
least not in that week or that month
you can do that or if you want to
improve your endurance while maintaining
your strength you can do that
and so on and so forth
most people I do believe would like a
combination of strength and endurance
and flexibility and maybe even
hypertrophy particularly for certain
muscle groups that maybe are not as well
developed as other muscle groups they
want to bring balance to their physique
both for sake of Aesthetics and for sake
of health and forsake of you know
General functioning to maybe even to
eliminate pain the protocol that I'm
going to describe really works as a
foundational template for that as well
so let's drill into that foundational
protocol and I'll keep referring to it
as the foundational protocol not because
it's the one that I use although it is
the one that I use and not because it's
the one that we're talking about today
although it's the one we're talking
about today but because we need some
general framework from which to build
out the more specific protocols that
we'll get into in a bit more detail
later so in this foundational protocol
for Fitness what you'll notice is that
on any one given day you're going to
focus on one particular aspect of
Fitness maybe it's endurance maybe it's
strength maybe it's hypertrophy in
particular it might be hypertrophy for a
particular muscle group or muscle groups
that said across the entire week it's
designed to bring Fitness and different
forms of Fitness to all aspects of your
body so this particular protocol begins
on Sunday although that's simply the day
that I happen to begin the protocol and
again this protocol is not important
because it's the one that I follow I
follow it because it is important in
other words it's a protocol that's
really gleaned from the scientific
literature and the experts that is for
you so this Fitness protocol is really
about you I just may refer to it as the
one that I follow simply for ease of
communication and for me my week begins
on Sunday so I do my very best to get a
workout in on Sunday and for me that
workout is that of a endurance workout
it's designed to either maintain or
increase my endurance
and the endurance type that I'm
referring to is endurance of 30 minutes
or more in fact
for me the goal is always to get either
60 to 75 minutes of jogging so this
would be so-called Zone 2 cardio people
probably have heard of Zone 2 cardio but
if you haven't that's okay Zone 2 cardio
is something that you could measure with
a heart rate monitor or other device but
you don't need to Zone 2 cardio is the
kind of cardiovascular exercise in which
you're pushing yourself to move
such that you're breathing faster than
normal your heart is beating faster than
normal however you are still able to
sustain a conversation but if you were
to push yourself any harder that is move
faster or go up a steeper incline at the
same rate you happen to be at any one
moment you would lose that ability to
speak you wouldn't be able to complete
sentences you would be out of breath or
you'd have to pause mid-sentence now
it's near impossible even with a heart
rate monitor to stay exactly in zone two
unless you're very very skilled at that
so I don't obsess over that and in fact
I don't wear a heart rate monitor when I
do this exercise but for me the goal is
to head out on Sunday and get 60 to 75
minutes of jogging in zone two now of
course I like to jog but that doesn't
mean that you have to jog you could
replace jogging with
rowing on a rowing machine or maybe even
rowing an actual boat if you have access
to that or cycling or swimming something
that allows you continuous movement for
60 to 75 minutes at that zone two
threshold we talked about earlier
for me that can include some hills and
when I say Hills they could be very
steep hills but I'll simply slow my Pace
down
in order to stay in that roughly zone
two range or it could be that they are
more low-grade Hills and I might you
know just slow down a little bit or I
might even push myself a tiny bit that
day but really I'm just trying to build
that long endurance I'm trying to build
up my capacity or maintain my capacity
to go a long distance without fatiguing
now some days meaning some Sundays since
I tend to do this almost always on
Sunday although there are exceptions
instead of doing the 60 to 75 minute jog
what I'll do is I will head out for a
long hike that could be two and a half
hours or three hours or maybe even a
four or five hour hike sometimes it's
very long and I'll do that sometimes
simply to mix up the routine
because sometimes jogging and jogging
the same routes gets boring to me I do
enjoy running that's something I've been
doing for a very long time but sometimes
it just gets a little bit um tedious and
I want to do something different also
sometimes I want to be social on Sundays
I want to head out on a hike with my
partner or I want to meet up with
friends and hike with them and so taking
a long hike on Sunday is something that
also could be quite social and then I
don't have to worry about also getting
in my workout when heading out on a hike
with my partner or going out to meet
with friends or things of that sort
I will say that there's a specific
tool or a specific change that you can
make to this Sunday long endurance or at
least what I consider long for me I mean
it's by no means a marathon or an Iron
Man but this long endurance training and
that's the use of a weight vest so
something that I've really started
utilizing more recently and by more
recently I really mean within the last
year or so is I purchased one of these
weight vests that can be anywhere from
10 to 50 pounds
what I use in the weight vest is is
irrelevant but it's certainly
changes the level of effort required
when taking a hike or even a walk now
there's an additional benefit of the
weight vest which is that if you are
going out for a hike or even for a walk
for social reasons and you're with
somebody that's not quite at the same
Fitness level that you are frankly it's
a little bit rude to just keep walking
ahead of them and running back or
running ahead and running back you know
oftentimes you really want to spend time
with the person and you don't want them
to feel as if they're holding you up and
so the weight vest is a terrific way to
get some additional work then as you'll
find if you wear a weight vest it is
additional work
on say a shorter hike so maybe the
person you're with only has time for an
hour long hike or maybe they just don't
have the fitness to do a two hour or
three hour hike so I'll throw on the
weight vest and I'll head out for a walk
with them or a hike with them or
sometimes I'll go out on a long hike
with the weight vest myself so again the
point of this for me Sunday although it
could fall on any day for you workout is
really to build up that long-form
endurance and this fits well with what
Dr Andy Galpin and Dr Peter attia
referred to as the real need to get in
some long endurance type work at some
point or even multiple points throughout
the week for me this long Sunday jog of
60 to 75 minutes or long Sunday hike or
weighted walk or weighted hike really
accomplishes that goal it sometimes
leads to a little bit of soreness
particularly in my calves or if I'm
wearing the weight vest sometimes my my
midsection will get sore because I'm
trying to remain upright so I think it
also builds up some muscular endurance
not just cardiovascular endurance but
again throughout the entire time that
I'm jogging or hiking what I'm trying to
get to is a place where I can feel that
my pulse rate is definitely elevated but
it's not so elevated that I have to stop
because I'm out of breath and because I
know some people out there might be
really neurotic about this sort of thing
if you have to stop because you're out
of breath that doesn't mean that you
blew the workout that you know you
aren't getting endurance of course
you're getting benefits from it so I'm
not absolutely neurotic about always
staying exactly in that heart rate zone
I might stop and have a conversation for
a moment if it's a longer hike although
I really try and keep moving and I try
and push myself just a little bit
further than where I'm exceedingly
comfortable and so for me doing this
long Sunday hike or jog really provides
a foundation a base for endurance that
then the other endurance workouts that
I'll describe later in that type place
later in the week can build on now as I
mentioned earlier we will get back to
the mechanisms that this Taps into and
why this is so useful there are multiple
benefits to doing these kinds of
endurance type workouts and Zone 2
cardio but by putting it at the start of
my week again my week starts on Sunday
I'm sure that regardless of how the rest
of the week goes that I got my endurance
training in and of course I'm going to
want to and I will do endurance training
other days during the week but if
something comes up or I happen to get
sick or I'm really behind in terms of
work and I can't get other workouts in
this Sunday long jog or hike really
provides that fundamental
I can honestly say foundation for
cardiovascular fitness and endurance
that I can hang my hat on and say okay
I've got that one in the bag and I can
then look to other days of the week to
focus on other aspects of Fitness now a
really important point to make about
this Sunday endurance workout is that it
allows you to check off a box and that
box is 75 or so minutes of Zone 2 cardio
because as you may have heard
either in this podcast or from others
out there like Dr Peter attia getting
180 to 200 minutes of Zone 2 cardio per
week has enormous positive effects on
longevity and enormous positive effects
on General Health
again in terms of cardiovascular
function but also metabolic fuel
utilization also in terms of your
musculature and your ability to use your
body over long distances for long
periods of time so while it doesn't
complete all 180 to 200 minutes per week
it certainly gets you a good distance
pun intended toward that goal now I want
to acknowledge that some people might be
starting a fitness program and so 60 to
75 minutes of jogging might be too long
or a three hour waited vested hike or
some people might even do what's called
a rock like you were a rucksack that
might be too much in which case
certainly start with less and go on flat
ground and go at the rate that allows
you to get into zone two but that is not
excessively difficult for you and then
as you build up Fitness you can add time
or you can add weight through a weight
vest or if you don't want to buy a
weight vest or can't afford one there's
a simple solution to that I actually
have a good anecdote about that one time
I was heading out for a hike with a
friend of mine he was a former deal team
operator I'll never forget this and he
said oh yeah I'll bring you
um I'll bring you a sack and I thought
he meant like a sack lunch like he was
going to bring lunch and I showed up and
he basically gave me a backpack that was
loaded with a bunch of stuff and the
backpack weighed about 40 pounds and
then we took a hike so um I was thinking
lunch he was thinking weighted backpack
I know weighted backpack or even just
any kind of strong sack that you can put
over your shoulders or even carry in
your arms it's going to work exceedingly
well to build in some extra requirement
for effort so you certainly don't have
to purchase a weight vest in order to uh
in order to get the benefits of bringing
additional weight along with you on
these long cardiovascular events but
again build up over time you can add
time you can add weight and that's also
a really nice feature of adding weight
which is at some point your schedule
might be such or you just don't really
want to keep adding more and more and
more time on this long endurance Sunday
in this case workout in that case add
weight you can also as you build up
Fitness you can add speed to it your
zone two and what zone two is won't
shift but what work is required from you
in order to get into zone two will shift
that is as you get more and more fit
you'll have to move faster and or bring
more weight in order to stay in zone two
and that will simply tell you that you
are indeed improving your endurance okay
so then Monday rolls around and I like
most everyone else out there I work on
Monday
I get right into my emails and
preparation for podcasts and running my
laboratory Etc however I make sure that
at some point on Monday and for me that
some point is typically and ideally
early in the morning so 7 A.M or so I
train my legs on Monday so that includes
quadriceps hamstrings and calves why do
I do that workout on Monday and what is
that workout designed to do well that
workout is really designed to make sure
that I'm either maintaining or building
strength in my legs
and this is not simply for aesthetic
reasons this is not simply to grow
bigger calves or grow bigger quadriceps
and hamstrings although it can
accomplish that as well depending on how
you train we'll talk about details of
training the reason for training legs on
Monday is several fold first of all they
are the largest muscle groups of the
body and by training your legs on Monday
it sets in motion a large number of
metabolic processes that carry you some
distance even through the whole week in
terms of elevating metabolism in terms
of amplifying certain hormonal events in
your body
Etc that are really beneficial in
addition to that I'm of the belief that
the legs are the foundation of the body
and provided you can train legs safely
that training legs is vitally important
not just for strength of the legs but
also for strength of your entire body
again some of that is through systemic
hormonal effects because if you're going
to train the large muscle groups of your
body under substantial loads you will
get systemic release of hormones not
just testosterone although certainly
test testosterone but also things like
growth hormone you get increases in all
sorts of so-called anabolic hormones
that even if you're somebody who's not
trying to increase muscle size because I
realize a lot of people are not trying
to do that these are hormones that shift
your metabolism and your overall tendon
strength and ligament strength and
overall musculature into what I would
call a strong foundation so for me
Monday is leg workout it also just feels
good to get the leg workout out of the
way earlier in the week and it
accomplishes another goal which is that
I sometimes will take one or two days
off of a leg workout because they can be
very intense and they are large muscle
groups and I'll explain what I do on the
off days they're not pure off days they
actually include some recovery type
training or even some all-out training
but by training legs on Monday
I'm able to get what I consider the
hardest
strength and hypertrophy workout out of
the way and again set all those positive
physiological effects in motion for the
entire week the other thing is that no
workout exists in isolation what you do
one day is going to be determined by
what you did the previous day and even
though the previous day I may have taken
a three hour wait vested hike never are
my legs so sore from that long slow
endurance work because it is long and
slow then I'm unable to train legs
contrast that with a say high intensity
interval training workout which comes
later in the week and my legs might be
sore in fact they might not even be
recovered such that I'm able to do a
real leg workout when I say a real
workout I'll describe what that means in
a moment so legs come on Monday and I
think that for those of you that are
using or interested in using resistance
training I suggest getting your leg
workout done early in the week and for
those of you that have heard the uh the
phrase you know don't skip leg day I
will go a step further and say don't
skip leg day and in fact make leg day
your first day of strength and
hypertrophy training put it on Monday
okay so now that we're talking about
resistance training the question is
going to come up about sets and Reps and
all of that business that was covered in
a lot of detail on the podcast with Dr
Andy Galpin and I'm going to get into
some of that detail now but I'm going to
wait until I describe the entire set of
workouts for the week before I go into
even more detail because there's a way
of what's called periodizing that is
changing the sets and Reps Etc across
the week and indeed from month to month
that's really optimal but I don't want
to make it seem as if all of that just
pertains to the leg workout it actually
pertains to all of the resistance
training so I'll just give you a couple
of teasers about the key principles of
resistance training that I think are
almost universally if not universally
than generally accepted in the strength
training and Physiology community and
then later I'll get back to some of the
overarching principles that apply to all
strength and hypertrophy workouts across
the week including the ones for the
Torso the arms Etc okay so legs fall on
Monday
I should say that leg workouts like all
resistance training workouts for me
consist of about again I'm not
neurotically attached this but about 10
minutes of warming up and then about 50
5 0 to 60 Minutes of real work now of
course some of that is going to be rest
between sets but by real work I mean
really hard work not necessarily to
failure we'll talk about failure in a
little bit but hard work where I'm
struggling to complete the final
repetitions if not going to to failure
to to continue to move the weight
repetitions
and again the entire work portion of
that workout is about 50 to 60 Minutes
why well past 60 Minutes you start
getting increases in cortisol that
really impede recovery and I personally
am somebody
that does not recover very well from
high intensity exercise I realize that
within the literature it is
believed and I think generally accepted
that when you stimulate muscle
hypertrophy or strength increases it
impacts the
nervous system it also causes things
like protein synthesis Etc there are a
number of different forms of adaptation
that occur to give you muscle strength
and size changes
and these days people talk a lot about
needing to stimulate muscle growth or
muscle strength at least every 48 hours
but I can tell you that I recover rather
slowly and I benefit from working the
same muscle group about twice per week
with longer or I should say more days of
rest in between those workouts so if I
train legs on Monday believe it or not
I'm only training legs on Monday I do
not have a second leg workout during the
week however on Friday I do a high
intensity interval training session that
serves two purposes one is it serves the
purpose of triggering a certain type of
endurance and getting my heart rate very
very high and in addition to that
because of the way I do that workout it
acts as a sort of supplement or a more
moderate intensity workout for
quadriceps hamstrings and calves such
that I at least never lose strength and
in fact generally build strength from
one leg workout to the next provided I'm
doing things correctly so what I'm not
referring to is the kind of classic uh
you know super high intensity training
once per week and then not actually
training that muscle group again for me
it's really training each muscle group
twice per week once directly and then
once indirectly either during another
weight training workout or during a
cardiovascular I should say endurance
training workout so again legs on Monday
the workout is 50 to 60 minutes after a
brief warm-up I generally pick two
exercises per muscle group so again I'm
doing calves I'm doing quadriceps and
I'm doing hamstrings you should pick the
exercises that work for you so that's
why I'm actually not going to share
which exercises I use I'll give you a
couple suggestions about the ones I do
use but really exercise selection as Dr
Andy Galpin pointed out is a very
important variable and the key thing to
emphasize for that variable is that you
need to be able to perform the movement
safely so I know there's a huge debate
out there and people love to argue about
whether or not one can squat or deadlift
for long periods of time or should or
should not some people say you
absolutely should I personally do not
squat and do not dead lift I've actually
never done much squatting or dead
lifting I know some people out there are
probably rolling their eyes or switching
the channel at this point
um but I can say that for me I've been
able to achieve the strength and
hypertrophy goals that I've been seeking
doing things like leg extensions and
hack squats or for hamstrings doing
things like leg curls and glute ham
raises or for calves doing standing and
seated calf raises and so on I think a
key principle that everyone should pay
attention to is one that was taught to
me
by an excellent strength coach years ago
and I still use this and at least it
works for me for each muscle group try
and find an exercise in which you get
that muscle into a weighted stretch
position so this would be for instance
the standing calf raise you know down at
the bottom it's weighted and you're in a
in a deep stretch provided you're doing
the uh the movement correctly as well as
another exercise where you're getting
contraction in the shortened position of
the muscle so for the hamstrings that
would be the leg curl for the calves it
would be a seated calf raise or for the
quadriceps the the leg extension is you
know if the machine is designed right
and you're doing it correctly the peak
contraction is largely going to occur at
the at the legs extended position but
then another exercise for each muscle
group that puts the muscle into more of
a stretched or at least a larger range
of motion or compound type movement but
ideally where there's some stretch there
so I guess I will tell you what exercise
exercise I do for the quadriceps going
to be leg extensions and hack squats I
use hack squats because I don't do free
bar squats for safety reasons and I like
the hack squat machine I'll do leg curls
and glute ham raises
for hamstrings and I'll do standing calf
raises and see calf raises for the
calves again those are the movements
that I use because I can perform them
safely in the repetition ranges and with
the weights that are required for me to
either maintain or build leg strength
and calf strength but you might decide
that for you deadlifts are absolutely
essential and terrific or squats free
bar squats are absolutely terrific or
front you know front squats I'm not here
to tell you which exercises to do or not
do I am telling you that it's probably
wise to at least consider
doing at least two exercises per muscle
group probably three maximum if you ask
me if you're doing your entire legs and
calves in one day but to think about
doing one exercise where the muscles
brought into that shortened Peak
contraction position like leg curls or
leg extensions or seated calf raise and
then another exercise for each muscle
group where there's more of an
elongation and maybe even a stretch on
the muscle group in fact that's a
principle that you'll hear me talk about
later when I talk about training other
muscle groups for strength and
hypertrophy so now you know
approximately how long to train
you might be somebody who can get away
with training for an hour and a half and
that won't impede recovery for me that
really starts to impede my recovery also
if I'm staying on task that 60 Minute
limit really works well for me do I
occasionally train for 75 minutes yes
because if I'm waiting for a piece of
equipment sometimes I have to just wait
longer so that happens but I really try
and keep the total duration of the
workout shorter how many sets and Reps
and rest intervals well that was covered
by Dr Andy Galpin as well without
getting into the total science here's a
brief summary of how to structure that
it's pretty clear that if you're going
to do
lower repetitions
and heavier weights that you're going to
want to do a bit more volume I know that
this spits in the face of what a lot of
people think but so if you're going to
do five sets of five I would consider
five repetitions low low repetition
range heavier weight
and if you're going to train with higher
repetitions you can do fewer sets that
certainly works for me
I generally follow a program where for
about a month so three to four weeks I
will do all my resistance training in
the repetition range of about four to
eight repetitions so that's rather heavy
a few more sets so it might be anywhere
from three to four sets per exercise
again still just two exercises and
longer rest between sets anywhere from
two minutes to maybe even four minutes
if it's really heavy leg work
and then for the next month switch to
repetition range that's closer to eight
to twelve maybe even 15 repetitions per
set but do fewer sets overall so maybe
just two to three sets per exercise
again just two exercises per muscle
group typically
and shorten the rest between sets so
that it's more in the 90 second maybe
even as short as 60 seconds rest between
sets but typically 90 seconds to about
two minutes or two and a half minutes so
basically it's one month heavier the
next month slightly lighter although I
wouldn't say light I would say moderate
weight and moderate rep range that tends
to work well for me it also adheres to a
principle that came up during the
discussion again with Dr Andy Galpin
that for hypertrophy you really can use
repetition ranges anywhere from five to
thirty three zero reps
but he emphasized changing the
repetition ranges in order to offset
boredom frankly I like to train heavier
I enjoy training in the four to eight
rep range however I noticed that if I do
that for more than four weeks in a row
and I don't switch over to training in
the 8 to 12 or maybe in 15 repetition
range for about a month well then I
can't make continuous progress I start
to actually lose ground but by switching
back and forth
I actually can make continuous progress
at least across the year so I hope that
that principle or I should say that
protocol was communicated clearly it
works very well I assure you
does that mean that I never get 10
repetitions on a week when I'm uh
supposed to train in the four to eight
repetition range no occasionally I'll
Venture up into the 10 repetition range
but I really try and cluster the low
repetition work for about a month again
across all workouts and all exercises
and the slightly higher I would say
moderate repetition work across to the
next month one thing that you'll notice
since we are talking about Total Fitness
programming is that during the month
it's where you are doing moderate
repetitions you'll notice that your
endurance work will actually be
facilitated and I do not think that's a
coincidence in fact it's not a
coincidence it's because when you are
training very heavy or in the heavier
range lower repetitions Etc you're
tapping into different processes in
those muscles so when you head out for
that long Sunday hike or as you'll soon
hear whereas on Friday you're going to
do high intensity interval training what
you'll notice is during certain months
of weight training when you're training
more heavy those workouts will feel
literally will feel different than they
will during the months when you're doing
moderate repetition work
I am not a competitive athlete I'm not
running races or triathlons like some of
my friends I'm very impressed by them
I'm really just trying to get overall
cardiovascular fitness overall strength
overall hypertrophy where I need it
maintain muscle size and Etc in muscle
groups where I'm just trying to maintain
that's really my goal so I'm not trying
to optimize any of these workouts for
any one performance feature but in a
little bit we'll talk about how you can
change various aspects that is variables
of this protocols in order to say for
instance really emphasize hypertrophy or
really emphasize endurance okay so with
what I would call a standard endurance
workout done on Sunday and I say
standard because most people when they
hear endurance they think of the ability
to endure to continue uh in a repeated
movement or exercise over some period of
time with that workout done on Sunday
and then with the leg workout done on
Monday you can feel really good about
how you're heading into the week however
after training legs on Monday
I experienced that doing cardiovascular
workouts the next day is either
inefficient or at least doesn't really
allow me to completely recover from my
leg workout now I realize that some
people are going to immediately scoff at
that and in fact
there are really beautiful papers out
there talking about how one can actually
do a fair amount of cardiovascular
exercise without interfering with their
strength and speed and hypertrophy
improvements
and vice versa in fact there's a
terrific review that was mentioned on
the podcast with Dr Andy Galpin this is
a review that will provide a citation to
um and a reference and a link to which
is the review by murak and Bagley which
talks about whether or not there's
interference between strength and
endurance workouts really interesting
review if you want to approve that but
with all that said I like to take
Tuesday as a no endurance no resistance
training day
but that doesn't mean that I'm not doing
anything for my overall health and
fitness
on Tuesdays I do a series of heat cold
contrast in other words I get really
really warm and then I get really really
cold I get really really warm and I get
really really cold repeatedly and the
way I do that is by getting into a hot
sauna so for me that's really hot but
I've built up my heat conditioning so
please don't do this unless you've built
up your ability to withstand heat and
I'll get in for about 20 minutes
sometimes 15 but usually 20 minutes then
I get out and then I will get into an
ice bath or a cold water bath that's
about 45 to 50 degrees Fahrenheit again
don't get into water that's so cold that
you go into shock I'll explain what a
good cold stimulus could be for you and
how to determine that or if I don't have
access to my sauna and my ice bath
what I can do if I'm traveling is I will
take a hot bath and then alternate with
cold shower hot bath cold shower it's
hard to do hot bath ice bath unless you
have two baths I don't know any hotel
rooms at least I've never stayed in one
that has two baths although I'm sure
they're out there but for me this is
heat cold contrast and really what this
day is about is two things first of all
I'm trying to accelerate recovery from
the leg workout I did previously also if
you listen to our episode of The
huberman Lab podcast about deliberate
heat exposure or you listen to our
episode of the human Lab podcast about
deliberate cold exposure
I talk about some of the benefits of
heat and cold and I get into a lot of
details about how you can access heat
you can do baths you can do saunas you
can even take hot showers if you don't
have access to any of that you could
even wrap your body from the neck down
in garbage bag plastic garbage bags
Believe It or Not wrestlers used to do
this put on some sweats and go running
that'll get you warm again be careful
not to overheat and then you can get
into a cold shower so there's a lot of
ways depending on your budget and what
you have access to
I don't use cryo these cryotherapy
Chambers they're hard to find they're
expensive again I use sauna and ice bath
and I will do anywhere from three to
five rounds which is a lot anywhere from
three to five rounds of heat for about
20 minutes and cold for about five
minutes
how cold should the cold be we covered
this in the episode on deliberate cold
exposure here's a general rule of thumb
it should be
cold enough that you really want to get
out but not so cold that it's unsafe and
that will vary from person to person so
I cannot give you a simple prescriptive
there same thing with the heat hot
enough that you're sweating and that you
want to get out but not so hot that
you're running the risk of injuring
yourself or killing yourself and again
that will vary from person to person so
you have to build up slowly be careful
and build up empirically I do that on
Tuesdays again as a way to accelerate
recovery and because it's very clear
that there are cardiovascular benefits
maybe even benefits for the brain
related to the cardiovascular benefits
because of course the brain needs a lot
of blood flow and needs a lot of
nutrients and other things flowing into
and out of their debris out and
nutrients and other things into the
brain
heat can help accelerate that or improve
that and so I'm doing that to improve
cardiovascular function improve brain
health
and then the cold contrast
provides a sort of accelerator on that
or an amplifier I think is the better
way to phrase it on that process because
in the cold you get Vaso constriction
and then in the heat you get
vasodilation and so you're maximizing
that process which is actually a neural
process nerves actually innervate the
blood vessels and capillaries and and
even the arteries in order to allow that
constriction and dilation process to
occur so Tuesday is really about
recovery but my recovery day isn't
necessarily about just laying around and
not doing anything I might still also
take some walks that day remember I want
to try and get that 200 minutes of Zone
2 cardio across the week and sometimes
not often but sometimes I'll get in a
few
um minutes or more of walking quickly
that day but generally I'm working a lot
on Tuesday as I do on Monday and I'm a
little bit tired of maybe even a little
bit sore from my leg workout the
previous day Monday so I try and get
that hot cold contrast there are other
benefits to hot and cold contrast we
have a description of the different
protocols for hot and for cold and their
contrast and our huberman lab newsletter
you can find that by going to
humanlab.com go to the newsletter tab
under the menu and you can sign up you
can actually download those protocols
very easily without even signing up if
you just want to access them straight
off so Tuesday is really about recovery
and about getting some additional
cardiovascular benefits from heat cold
contrast one other thing that's built
into the rationale for doing a lot of
heat eaten cold on one day as opposed to
doing it every day well in addition to
it being a little bit more convenient
because certainly some people don't have
access to heat and cold sauna and cold
dunks Etc every day so maybe getting to
do that one day is more accessible or
feasible but in addition to that it's
very clear that while there are benefits
to doing sauna often and we talk about
this in the deliberate heat episode and
the episode with Dr Rhonda Patrick when
she was a guest on this podcast
it's also clear that if you do sauna
seldom that is once a week but you do a
lot of it on one day so in this case
it's an hour if it's remember it's or
more it's three to five rounds of 20
minutes of sauna followed by about five
minutes of cold or so by doing that all
on one day the peer-reviewed research
that's covered in the episode on
deliberate Heat
this is a study out of Finland showed
that you get massive even 16-fold
increases in growth hormone which are
extremely beneficial for metabolism and
for recovery so these massive increases
in growth hormone are seen when you are
doing these sessions of sauna that are
repeated on the same day and you're only
doing that about once a week whereas if
you do sauna more often there are
certainly benefits to that but it's time
consuming and you need access to sauna
more often than one day a week if you're
doing it more than one day a week but if
you do it one day a week and you're
doing a lot of sessions within that day
as I've detailed here you see these
massive increases in growth hormone that
are not observed if you're doing sauna
more often for the other benefits of
sauna now the effects of cold are many
it's not just vasoconstriction but the
effects of cold are also counterbalanced
by some of the problems with deliberate
cold exposure then maybe you've heard
about on this podcast and a lot of other
podcasts and seem to be a kind of a buzz
theme on Twitter and elsewhere and the
point is this there are a number of
quality studies showing that if you do
deliberate cold exposure in particular
ice baths are getting into very cold
water
immediately after an endurance training
session or a strength and hypertrophy
session
it can indeed yes it can disrupt or
prevent some of the adaptations that you
are seeking with strength and
hypertrophy and endurance workouts okay
so you heard that right and I believe
that to be true based on now several
quality peer-reviewed studies so by
doing your deliberate cold exposure on
Tuesday you're not going to get those
effects
that is the blocking of hypertrophy or
the blocking of strength Improvement or
the blocking or prevention of
improvements in endurance that would
occur if you immediately got into the
ice bath after a hypertrophy strength or
endurance workout now the caveat to that
is if you are somebody who likes to do
cold showers I am not aware of any data
that says that cold showers cannot be
performed after a strength hypertrophy
or endurance workout
cold showers are different than
submersion up to the neck in an ice bath
or another cold body of water for a
number of different reasons in fact they
tap into different aspects of the
nervous system entirely we don't have
time to go into that now it's covered in
the episode on deliberate cold exposure
but the simple point is by doing your
heat and cold contrast or Hey listen if
you're somebody who doesn't have access
to Saun or you don't like hot baths and
you just do some deliberate cold
exposure on Tuesday you are doing that
separate from your strength and
hypertrophy and endurance workouts such
that it will not impede the benefits of
those workouts okay so long Endurance on
Sunday leg resistance training on Monday
and on Tuesday heat cold contrast that
brings us to Wednesday and on Wednesday
we get back to a resistance training
workout and the resistance training
workout that I emphasize on Wednesday is
one in which you train your torso yes
literally your torso I know this is
counter to the so-called Bro Science of
bro splits I don't know who originated
that term it's a terrible term it
essentially
um alienates anyone who's not a bro or
considers themselves a bro but in in any
case this is not about training chest or
back or shoulders in fact it's really
about strengthening the muscles of the
Torso and of course includes the chest
and the shoulders and the back and I'm
sure as I say this a number of people
out there who are obsessed with
hypertrophy and muscle growth and
filling out their shirts or whatever it
may be are thinking oh no you know this
is just kind of all around Fitness but
no the point is on Wednesday you train
your torso and that's going to involve
some pushing so that's good for you that
might include some training of things
like bench presses or incline presses as
well as shoulder presses or lateral
raises things for the shoulders as well
as for the back some pulling exercises
these could be bent over rows or chin
UPS or pull-ups again there are enormous
number of exercises for each and every
one of these muscle groups now I believe
there's a clear benefit to training all
these muscle groups together on the same
day
because much in the same way that
training legs all on one day can lead to
these systemic effects because they're
large muscle groups working both the
pushing muscles and the pulling muscles
of the Torso on one day at least in the
context of this program is very time
efficient and tends to Wick out into a
number of different dimensions of Health
that at least I'm interested in and I
think a lot of other people are
interested in what are those well let's
think again I want to be strong in not
just my legs but my upper body I also
may want may want to engage some
hypertrophy to grow certain muscle
groups in order to create a sense of
balance that could be for aesthetic
reasons but also for balancing strength
and for health and the Integrity of the
joints Etc and in addition to that by
training a bunch of different muscle
groups together
you have the opportunity to get the more
systemic hormonal effects and metabolic
effects that occur when you're not just
training one muscle group and isolating
that one muscle group but rather
training a bunch of muscle groups
together
so Wednesday I trained torso and I do
that in push-pull fashion just for
um kind of time efficiency
sometimes that means doing a pushing
exercise and then a pulling exercise
sometimes it might even mean doing a set
of pushing and then a set of pulling and
going back and forth however if you're
in a gym in a particular crowded gym
please don't be one of those people that
colonizes multiple pieces of equipment
and says I'm working there I'm working
there and you know that can be quite a
dance and it can be hard to to
orchestrate a workout like that so
sometimes it will be you know starting
off with a set of shoulder presses and
then doing all you know all your sets of
those and then moving to your chin ups
and then moving perhaps back to
shoulders and realizing ah oh someone's
on the machine that I wanted or using
the equipment I wanted so I'll just
finish up the pulling I'll finish up the
back work and then going to the push I
don't obsess over the alternation in any
kind of strict way I really just try and
get the muscles of the Torso trained and
again it's two exercises per muscle
group and one of those exercises is
going to be something where there's I
realize this isn't physiologically
accurate but a shortening of the muscle
or where they at the end of the movement
the muscle is under maximal contraction
I could throw out some names of
exercises just for for purpose of
understanding so this would be you know
um like Cable Crossovers for the chest
the the peak contraction is at the end
whereas something like an incline press
there's more of a stretch provided it's
done over a full range of motion at the
beginning of the movement so again
something where there's a stretch and
something where there's a peak
contraction for the shoulders it's a
little bit harder to do although there
are ways to do that and Jeff Cavalier
has excellent workouts available zero
cost on YouTube he also has excellent
programs on his athleanx.com site but
certainly has a lot of excellent
protocols on his YouTube and Instagram
but on YouTube you can put in
his name and any muscle group that you
want to train he has some terrific
videos describing exercise choice and
other features of exercise parameters
again a peak contraction or shortening
of the muscle Peak contraction exercise
and a stretching exercise and so for the
back one might say Okay a seated row or
a bent over row or a dumbbell row where
the elbow is brought behind the Torso
for a peak contraction movement and then
for more of a stretching movement might
be something like a a chin up or a
pull-up and as I say this I understand
that stretching and Peak contraction
aren't the exact terms that one would
use if they were a physio therapist or
strength and conditioning coach but I
think for the typical person who's
trying to generate strength and
hypertrophy in those muscles or maintain
strength and hypertrophy in those
muscles this kind of nomenclature way of
describing it at least should be clear
and and even efficient and just to
remind you as with the leg workout the
total duration of the Torso workout is
going to be 50 to 60 minutes after a
brief warm-up the sets and repetitions
are going to be dictated in the same way
that I described earlier so for about a
month it's going to be
more sets so anywhere from three to five
sets in the lower repetition range so
four to eight repetitions so that's
gonna be heavier weights and longer rest
as I described earlier the rest
intervals and then for the next month
it's going to be moderate repetitions
fewer sets the same way I described
earlier and if you want more details on
all of that you can find that in the
newsletter related to the optimal or
foundational Fitness protocol that you
can access at hubermanlab.com one thing
I should note about the Wednesday torso
workout is that I am a big believer in
training the what I believe is the
highly
avoided or at least overlooked but
vitally important aspect of total body
stability strength and safety really
safety which is the neck I realize a lot
of people don't want a large neck and I
totally understand for aesthetic reasons
why they don't want that it's kind of
interesting actually if you think about
it that people have a large neck are
often told they have no neck people say
that guy has no neck or they have no
neck when in fact they're referring to
the fact that they have a very large
neck I don't know how that came to be
someone you put in the comments why that
is how come when people have a big neck
they refer to it as no neck so why do I
train the neck I train the neck for a
couple of reasons one is years ago I had
an accident where I actually fell off a
roof and I'd been training my neck at
that time uh for a sport that I was
involved in and I walked away from it
with a sore neck but not a broken neck
and I thought wow it's really great that
I have
been training my neck in addition to
that I was once in a car accident where
I was parked I just bought the car it's
my first new car purchase parked in that
car
with my mother and my grandfather in the
back seat at the red light and someone
rammed into us at full speed now
fortunately none of us were hurt we were
all
um rattled
um and once again I was very sore in my
back and in my neck but I think one of
the reasons why
I was able to essentially walk away from
that I didn't have any sustained damage
was because I trained my neck but I
started training my neck for sport and I
continued to train my neck because I
noticed when I don't train my neck I
start getting shoulder issues and if you
talk to an excellent physiologist like
Dr Kelly Starrett of the ready State as
an excellent Channel you'll find them on
all the social media and standard
channels or you talk to
uh anyone out there who really
understands the strength of the Torso in
the upper body and even the back what
you learn is that of course being the
upper portion of the spine stabilizing
your neck is very important now training
the neck can be a little bit detailed
and specific and even dangerous if you
do it wrong again Jeff Cavalier has a
terrific set of videos on training the
neck properly I know a lot of people out
there might think neck Bridges and I
used to do neck Bridges I occasionally
still sneak in a Neck Bridge here or
there although I don't recommend it
because in discussions with Jeff
he will tell you and it's true that the
discs eventually go and you can run into
serious issues from doing Bridges and it
doesn't happen gradually so you can't
notice it happening it just happens
suddenly so I might occasionally do a
Neck Bridge but in general I'll train
neck by wrapping a plate in a towel so
that I don't end up with an imprint of
the the weight value on my head or face
and then moving the neck from side to
side or front or back and again we'll
provide a link to those videos it's a
terrific set of videos that describe how
to train your neck properly and safely
so even if you're not trying to grow
your neck you definitely want to make
sure that you use some light weights to
make sure that your neck is stable and
upright I say stable and upright because
it's very clear that for
reasons related to texting and staring
down at computers and related to weak
neck relative to the rest of the muscles
that stabilize the spine a lot of people
their default stance or their default
posture is with chin forward and that's
not good not only is it aesthetically
not good
but it also can create all sorts of
issues related to back pain and
headaches and things of that sort this
is a real thing training your neck
allows you to stand upright sit upright
I even believe that it allows you to do
things like public speaking or have
conversations with people on the street
in a way where you are front facing as
opposed to looking down so Wednesday is
torso and neck and then comes Thursday
and that means another cardiovascular
exercise session
although it's a brief one unlike the
endurance training on Sunday the
cardiovascular session on Thursday and
again for me it falls on Thursday but
for you it could fall on a different day
depending on when you started this
protocol
is going to be about again about 35
minutes
of for me running although it could be
rowing or it could be cycling it could
be something of that sort
the goal of this workout is what's
important the goal of this workout is to
tap into remember that long list that we
talked about earlier where you've got
skill and speed and power and strength
and hypertrophy Etc different forms of
endurance is to get into that range of
endurance
where your heart rate is elevated quite
a bit more than zone two but that you're
not really going all out Sprint so what
that means for me is warming up for
about five to ten minutes that could be
jogging a little bit of light
calisthenics might even be hopping on a
stationary bike although to be honest I
loathe the stationary bike and then
setting a timer and doing about 30 but
ideally 35 minutes of what I call
75 to 80 percent of all out okay now I
realize this spits in the face of all
you heart rate monitor wearing
um super techie exercise types but when
I think of all out Sprint I think of 100
and what is that in my mind that's
somebody is chasing me with a needle
full of poison and I am sprinting away
at maximal speed that for me is a
hundred percent so after a brief warm-up
what I'm going to do is go out typically
outside although sometimes it has to be
on a treadmill if I'm traveling and
move run for about 30 to 35 minutes at
about 75 or 80 percent of that all out
what that means is that I'm striving to
keep a steady Pace but in reality I
don't
I sometimes have to stop at a stoplight
there are cars please don't run into
traffic just to maintain that speed and
that timing that would be
terribly antagonistic to Fitness and
particular lifespan
that running tends to be running in
which I'm breathing hard so I'm not able
to restrict myself to purely nasal
breathing and I should have mentioned
earlier on the Sunday long rock or
weighted hike or jog if I'm alone I try
and do pure nasal breathing if I'm with
other people or I'm talking obviously
I'm not gonna do pure nasal breathing
because I'm talking although I am sure
that sometimes they wish I was doing
pure nasal breathing that Thursday
workout accomplishes a number of things
first of all it really gets my heart
rate up and it improves multiple aspects
of endurance because as you recall
earlier the different bins of endurance
that include muscular endurance
anaerobic that three to twelve minute
range and then 30 minutes or longer none
of them really precisely match what's
accomplished in this 35 minute or so
cardiovascular session where I'm pushing
hard but not all out
but that's exactly the reason to do it
which is that it Taps into multiple fuel
systems for the muscle and multiple
aspects of the heart and capillaries and
arteries and veins that are involved in
generating that movement so it really
cuts a broad swath into multiple
categories of endurance and also just
keep in mind what this foundational or
optimal Fitness protocol is really
designed to do
in my mind a foundational Fitness
protocol is one that leaves you or has
you in a state where if you need to walk
really far and carry a bunch of weight
you can do it if you need to lift a
heavy object with your legs you can do
it if you need to run really fast for
two minutes you can do it and if you
need to run a little bit further like
maybe even 10 minutes for whatever
reason you can do that so it's really
kind of all-around fitness program and
that 35 minute run again could be
swapped with a 35 minute ergro or
sometimes if you only have access to a
stationary bike you could do that I
suppose if you didn't have access to any
equipment and running is not your thing
one thing that I have done especially if
I've been stuck in a hotel because I
arrived late someplace and I really want
to get this workout in you could do the
dreaded Burpee I know there are a lot of
opinions out there some people think
burpees are downright dangerous other
people love burpees you could do that or
you could do really fast but full
jumping jacks I know that's a little PE
class right physical education class-ish
but sometimes if I need to get the
workout in what I'll do in a hotel if
I've arrived late a particular day of
travel is I will find the stairwell the
fire stairwell I'll make sure by the way
that I can get back into the building
because I've been locked in those
stairwells before and I will simply walk
really fast up the stairwell as many
flights of stairs as there are or maybe
even jog it not quite Sprint but maybe
run up those stairs over and over and
over again in order to get that 35
minutes of 75 to 80 percent of Max
output cardiovascular work done and if
I'm really just restricted to my hotel
room I'll just do jumping jacks for 30
35 minutes sometimes while watching
something on TV and believe me if you're
doing full jumping jacks like really
extending your legs really getting arms
overhead and really doing the full
movement
by time you hit five or six minutes you
are going to be sweating and your your
heart rate is really going to be up I
also sometimes will travel with a jump
rope I always try and travel with a jump
rope and skip rope
um much to the dismay of the people who
are housed below me in the hotel room
skipping rope I should mention can be a
very effective way of getting
cardiovascular training while you're on
the road but in all seriousness if
you're in a hotel room or an apartment
and you can't really jump high and
you're very good at jumping rope what
you'll find is it's not going to get you
into that higher elevated heart rate
zone okay it can be great for zone two
type training but if you're really good
at skipping rope and I wouldn't say I'm
really good at it but I've done enough
skipping rope that I can just kind of
cruise and talk and it's more Zone
two-ish even feels like walking at times
now you can do double unders where
you're you know really jumping and
putting the Rope under you twice each
time or crossovers Etc depending on your
skill level
but again if you're in an apartment or
you're in a hotel that's going to be
harder to do and because there's some
skill involved sometimes you're stopping
more often than you're continuing uh by
the way and I I just have to mention
this a really terrific Instagram channel
is Anna skips this is a teacher a
science teacher or I believe it's a math
maths as they say in the UK because
she's in the UK maths teacher I don't
know Anna but I know she skips because
she has this amazing Instagram Channel
called Anna skips and what's really cool
about her Instagram is she shows you her
progression from not being able to skip
rope at all to the absolutely incredible
types of rope skipping that she's doing
each morning while getting sunlight
which of course is a Essential Health
protocol so check out Anna skips on
Instagram really inspiring and made me
want to get better at skipping rope I'm
still working on it okay so with that
Thursday cardiovascular let's call it
endurance but cardiovascular training
workout done around rolls Friday and on
Friday I'm going to do another
cardiovascular training session and I
alluded to this earlier but this
cardiovascular training session is also
designed to tap into some of the ability
of hard
I should say high intensity interval
training
to tap into strength and hypertrophy
increases for the legs because remember
we train legs on Monday and what the
science tells us is that protein
synthesis in a muscle group can be
stimulated about every 42 to 72 hours
and so we've had Tuesday off Wednesday
off and Thursday off and you don't want
to lose progress that you made from that
terrific Monday leg workout but in order
to make sure that you can do the other
things that follow in this program and
pick back up on Monday with another leg
workout at least for me with my recovery
abilities and my work schedule I'm not
going to do an entire other leg workout
because it's going to set the whole
thing out of whack that is I won't be
able to consistently do the same
workouts on the same days of each week
now with that said a little bit later
I'll explain what happens if you have to
miss a workout and how you can combine
days Etc but I really strive to get
certain workouts done on certain days
consistently at least as best I can so
Friday is high intensity interval
training
and that can take a variety of different
forms
for me the ideal thing to do for me
again you could do something completely
different exercise Choice again should
be governed by what you can do safely so
you don't injure yourself and that you
can perform effectively and that gets
you or provides you the stimulus that
you want and what I'm trying to do on
Friday is get my heart rate way way up
talked about this in the episode with Dr
Andy Galpin in addition
to the benefits of getting 180 to 200
minutes of Zone 2 cardio per week
minimum
it's a really good idea to get up to
that Max or near max heart rate at least
once a week and you're not going to do
that for very long periods of time
you're not going to do that for 30
minutes you can't Sprint all out for 30
minutes unless you're Steve Prefontaine
if you haven't seen the movies without
limits or Prefontaine you should
absolutely see those he was able to you
know go out and run 12 laps what seemed
to be an all-out Sprint we're close to
it incredible but most people are not
going to do that or are going to be
carried away on a stretcher if they try
these high intensity interval training
for me ideally would be on the so-called
assault bike or airdyne bike so these
bikes that have the fan which um might
seem like oh you know it just cools you
off but actually there's a lot of
resistance there so what I'll I will
typically do is a 20 to 30 second
all-out Sprint using arms and legs
and then 10 seconds rest and then repeat
all out Sprint for 20 to 30 seconds 10
seconds rest repeat and I'll do that for
anywhere from 8 to 12 rounds which
trust me even if you start out a little
bit less or I should say not all out
intensity or effort by time you hit the
fifth or sixth one you will be certainly
headed into if not near your maximum
heart rate now what is your maximum
heart rate do you need a heart rate
monitor no if you'd like using that sort
of thing great but again Andy Galvin
beautifully supplied us with the
information he said if you take the
Number 220 and you subtract your age
that for most people most is going to be
your maximum heart rate although for
certain people who are very fit or
certain ages that's not going to apply
so it's a little bit too crude to
measure but it's a good starting place
and you can look up other information or
see that podcast episode we provide a
link to it in the show note captions if
you want to get more details on that I
don't use a heart rate monitor what I'm
trying to do is get to that point where
I quote unquote feel like I want to die
now I don't want to die and please don't
die right if you're not in good
cardiovascular health do not just jump
right into this Fitness protocol but I
want to get to the point where I really
feel like I could not pedal any faster
or pull any faster on the on the assault
bike the airtime bike or if I'm doing
this workout in a place or at a time or
because I choose to not use a bike or a
rower because you could also use a rower
I will simply do Sprint jog intervals I
will Sprint for 20 or 30 seconds then
jog for 10 seconds Sprint for 20 or 30
seconds and then jog for for 10 seconds
and just repeat I used to have a big
field next to my laboratory my old
laboratory and I used to bring my
Bulldog Costello out there he was really
good at the first Sprint part and then
he would just lie down and watch he
didn't even do the jog part I would just
go back and forth back and forth back
and forth panting like a bulldog
non-stop barely able to recover before
sprinting again and the basis of this
workout again is several first of all
it's to get the heart rate really high
up towards maximum heart rate
at least once a week so you accomplish
that this Friday Also if you are
sprinting and then jogging or you are
really pushing hard on an assault bike
or an airdyne bike or using a for
instance a skier or a skier machine or
any number of different cardiovascular
um training tools you are going to get
activation of the legs
of course not to the same degree as you
would with squats or deadlifts or leg
extensions and leg curls that's simply
not the case but you're going to trigger
strength and hypertrophy and other types
of adaptations in those muscle groups so
this for me also represents the second
leg workout of the week where I'm not
touching any weights one important point
that I don't think I've heard mention
anywhere else but that I hope to have Dr
Kelly starrette on the podcast to
discuss and that I've discussed with him
one-on-one which is
be careful with all out Sprints or all
out anything cardiovascular exercise you
can get injured doing those so for
instance if you go out and you just
Sprint across a field all out 20 or 30
seconds and then walk back and can do it
again and again
don't be surprised if the next day you
have some sciatica or even some pelvic
floor pain I don't recommend going all
out on any movement that you can't
perform with perfect form okay so for me
I really try and stay away from all out
Sprints I'll Sprint at about 95 percent
of what I can do because I find if I go
all out Sprint I don't know what the
reason is but it might be an over
extension of a limb or something like
that I'm not a sprinter I'm not a
sprinting coach I do hope to get Stu
McMillan on here or
um Dan faff they were excellent
sprinting coaches at some point they're
world-class sprinting coaches but I'm
not a pro Sprinter I'm not even a
amateur Sprinter I'm a fitness Sprinter
so The Airliner assault bike or the
rower is really a safer option for me
and if I'm running or I'm doing some
sort of movement where I'm unconstrained
really in terms of how far my stride is
I mean I'm obviously constrained by the
musculature I'm really careful to not
over extend or do something like that
and the only way to do that is to not go
all out so again the goal for this
Friday workout is to really get the
heart rate high do high intensity
interval training there are a number of
different ways you could do that you can
look up HIIT hit workouts online find
the one that's best for you and really
pick something that's safe that you can
do consistently and I believe that
ideally will also trigger a bit of
either strength and hypertrophy and
speed power maintenance or even give you
a little bit of a stimulus so that by
time you roll around to that leg workout
on again on Monday you've got a little
bit of an additional boost to your leg
strength hypertrophy speed and Power so
we've covered Sunday through Friday
and then Saturday rolls around and
Saturday is when you train arms calves
and neck so this may sound as if you're
training a bunch of small muscle groups
biceps triceps necks and calves and
that's true but I should mention that
you are also training your torso a
second time and you're doing it
indirectly or sometimes not indirectly
why do I say this well keep in mind
again that for strength and hypertrophy
you're going for that once about every
48 to 72 hours you want to stimulate
that
on Wednesdays when you trained your
torso right chest shoulders back and
neck
you've had Thursday to rest Friday to
rest I know a lot of people are going to
want to emphasize those body parts
they're going to think oh you have to
train it twice a week but
if you have modest recovery ability or
low recovery ability
such as I do and you're doing these
other cardiovascular training sessions
Etc well then on Saturday is when you
will train arms calves and neck directly
but included in that remember two
exercises per muscle group one with a
peak contraction one with somewhat of a
stretch in there included in that
I suggest doing some sort of dip
movement
which I think it was Pavel satsu and
said the dip is synonymous with or at
least similar to an upper body squat um
excuse me Pavel if I got that wrong
maybe it wasn't you that said that but
big admirer of his work and certainly
the dip is a great exercise to hit
multiple muscle groups it chest
shoulders and triceps maybe even some
back to some extent depending on how you
do it so doing some dipping movement
will indirectly stimulate strength
hypertrophy Etc in the chest and
shoulders and including some sort of
pulling movement for the bicep like a
chin up or Palms facing
movement pulling up from to the bar
especially if it's a closed script type
movement but even if it's a wide grip
type movement will of course
trigger strength and hypertrophy
maintenance or improvements in the
biceps but will also
trigger strength hypertrophy in the lat
in the back okay so Saturday is this arm
workout that I'll just give an example
of a potential workout where you might
do a few more exercises maybe not just
two but maybe three to make sure you get
the Torso indirect stimulation so what
would this look like well this might be
your sort of classic dumbbell curls for
the bicep and maybe incline curl for the
bicep because it has more of a stretch
so on an incline bench and then you
might finish with two sets of chin UPS
so Palms facing you chin UPS or three
sets of chin UPS depending on whether or
not you're in a heavier load month or a
lot or a more moderate weight month
again activating the biceps muscles
because arms day but also activating
strength and hypertrophy in the lats OR
at least maintaining it so that because
you're not training those torso muscles
again until Wednesday you're not
allowing the hypertrophy and strength
gains that you generated on Wednesday to
atrophy to disappear
then thinking about triceps
it might be some sort of triceps
isolation or Peak contraction movement
so that could be tricep Kickback or some
overhead extension would be more of a
stretch type movement than a kickback
but then also doing regular old dips you
might even start with dips which again
are going to activate those torso
muscles and the triceps
and then calf work in the same way that
you did on Monday and neck work again I
am a believer in training neck multiple
times per week and if you are able to
finish all of that in 45 or 50 minutes
great most people will find when you're
doing a lot of small muscle groups
actually takes longer because you have
to go around to more exercises but again
just adhere to the same principles we
talked about before about 50 5 0 to 60
Minutes of real work after a warm-up
with an asterisk next to that that if
someone's on the equipment or you can't
find the dumbbells you need Etc
then maybe 75 minutes max but really
trying to not extend that workout too
long
making sure that you activate the arms
directly but also activating the Torso
muscles indirectly and again I won't
repeat it this time again but following
the same weight and repetition and rest
interval scheme that we talked about
earlier a bit heavier lower reps more
sets and longer rest for about a month
and then alternating to more repetitions
yet fewer sets
right
shorter rest intervals and do that for
about a month this carries through for
all the resistance training workouts
regardless of the day of the week so
we've completed the total Arc across the
week and we can summarize it as saying
Sunday is let's just say long endurance
Monday is leg resistance training
Tuesday heat cold contrast Wednesday
torso training plus neck Thursday I
would call it moderate intensity
cardiovascular exercise so that 35
minute moderate intensity cardiovascular
exercise Friday high intensity interval
training of sprinting or some variation
thereof and Saturday arms calves neck
and torso indirect work
that's the total structure but I want to
emphasize again you do not need to start
this on Sunday that is you could make
the long endurance work start on Tuesday
and then just fill in the rest as
described before
it's really up to you
there's another important point I want
to make which is that
neither I nor anyone is going to be
successful in doing the exact workouts
on the exact same days of every week
because of travel work illness other
demands Etc the thing about the schedule
that I like so much and that I do
believe that will benefit you as well is
that you have some flexibility there
what's the flexibility well let's say
you train your typical Sunday work out
of endurance then you train legs on
Monday
and then you
don't manage to do your heat cold
contrast on Tuesday for whatever reason
well you can put it on Wednesday just
make sure that if you're going to do the
cold stimulus that you don't do it too
close not within four or ideally eight
hours after the training of torso but
you could do it before or you could do
it just heat and skip the cold that
particular week right not ideal but
better than not doing anything let's say
for instance the leg workout was
particularly brutal you don't sleep that
well on Monday night or Tuesday night
well then should you do the Torso
workout on Wednesday well I would say
why not move the heat cold contrast to
Wednesday and then push that torso work
out to Thursday
and maybe also try and do that 35 minute
run on Thursday every once in a while
rather than lose the total control of
the program and let everything Shuffle
forward here's the basic principle I do
believe that any one of these workouts
whether it's for endurance or resistance
training can be shifted either one day
forward or one day back
right you could delay it by a day or you
could accelerate it by A Day In order to
make sure that you get everything done
across the week
in fact I would say the best way to
think about this foundational fitness
program is not from the details up but
from the top down from the big picture
down to the details and say to yourself
once a week you're going to get some
long endurance in
another day during the week you're going
to make sure that you get a kind of
moderate faster endurance workout in and
then one other day during the week
you're going to get an all-out Sprint
high intensity
cardiovascular exercise workout in
you're going to get those three workouts
in somehow and then in addition to that
you will also do resistance training for
every muscle group in your body
and that means doing your legs hard at
least once a week
your torso hard at least once a week and
your arms hard at least once a week and
of course you are also paying attention
to train your calves and I do for
reasons I describe before believe that
you want to train your neck at least to
keep it strong you may not want to
generate hypertrophy there
people vary in terms of how quickly
their net grows some people grows very
very fast other people for the life of
them they can't get much hypertrophy in
their neck but keeping that neck strong
at least through some very light work to
moderate weight work very very important
for reasons I stated earlier if you set
out those goals
then the specific days that you do each
workout isn't as critical but the
specific spacing is so for instance
you're not going to want to do your high
intensity interval training the day
after you train your legs because if
you're doing that high intensity
interval training correctly you're going
to be
taxing your legs and eating into their
recovery and so you want to space them
out by two or three days so I think
you'll notice that the point is really
to optimize everything on the whole
rather than any one specific aspect of
training or adaptation now that said I
do realize that some people might be
hyper focused on things like strength
and hypertrophy and the Aesthetics that
come with it a key point about strength
hypertrophy and weight training and this
is something that has been covered on
multiple podcasts certainly the one with
Jeff Cavalier and with Dr Andy Galvin
and the one that I did on building
muscle strength and hypertrophy the solo
episode
and that is the following
it is the rare individual who has
perfectly balanced musculature right
most people can be a bit quad dominant
or hamstring dominant or they have
trouble activating their glutes or
somebody has a terrible time trying to
activate their chest muscles but they're
very strong in the back Etc
it's very clear that we can know that
not just based on Aesthetics
right but based on deliberate
contractibility of those muscles so I
don't want to get into this in too much
detail for sake of time but this is
something that has peer-reviewed
research to support it and was also
discussed extensively with Jeff Cavalier
when he was a guest
and that actually he's really
popularized this notion and it's
absolutely true which is that if you can
contract a muscle very hard to the point
where it almost feels like it's cramping
if you can do that even when there's no
weight in your hand where there's no
resistance against it so you're just
using your mind muscle connection to
contract that muscle hard and isolate it
chances are you'll be able to generate
hypertrophy and strength gains pretty
easily in that muscle compared to
muscles that you have a harder time
activating so during all resistance
training that mind muscle link is really
important
so much so that some people will even
try and emphasize contraction of the
muscles in between sets Etc I personally
because I'm not somebody who likes a
mirror when I work out and I'm not
somebody who um wants to spend time in
between sets flexing muscles and etc for
whatever reason I want to actually rest
between sets and I'm more concerned with
performance during those sets and really
putting my mind into the muscle during
the set I really try and emphasize deep
relaxation between sets and so here's a
tool that again is built out of science
and I should say peer-reviewed studies
some of which are being done in my lab
but other labs as well which is that in
between sets what I really strive to do
is to bring my heart rate down as much
as possible calm myself down as much as
possible and I'll do the so-called
physiological PSI in order to do that
that's two inhales through the nose back
to back
and then long full exhale through the
mouth I just did it partially there for
sake of time again so a big deep inhale
through the nose and then sneak in a
little bit more on a second inhale to
maximally inflate the lungs and the
alveoli the lungs and then a
full exhale of all your air via the
mouth to empty your lungs that's the
fastest way that we are aware of to calm
your nervous system down and really in
between sets you can use that to calm
yourself down and conserve energy but
then as you move into the weight
training set
you really want to ratchet up your focus
and attention to the muscles that you're
going to be using now I'd like to
acknowledge that there's a huge range of
parameters in terms of how to actually
perform during the set you can focus on
a particular muscle and try and really
isolate from the beginning of the
movement some people will really try and
isolate it only during the peak
contraction some people accentuate the
negative their Speed and Cadence there
are again remember concepts are few
methods are many and if you're
interested in the various methods of
eccentrics and concentrics and all the
different ways of changing up Cadence
and so forth during sets there's an
enormous amount of quality information
out there far too much for us to get
into into detail now but what I describe
the general principles of how to set
your mind if you will during the set you
should be focused on the muscles that
you're using and or moving the weight if
movement of the weight is more important
you can either focus on moving the
weight or challenging muscles right you
can either try and isolate muscles and
make specific muscles do the work or
simply moving the weight
moving the way to some is going to be
more geared towards strength
improvements but focusing on the muscles
so-called my muscle link is going to
shift that very same set more toward
hypertrophy I realize I'm painting with
a broad brush here but nonetheless this
is grounded in the way that the nervous
system governs muscular contraction and
while I think most people are familiar
with the number of different variables
associated with resistance training you
know sets reps rest intervals Cadence
Etc
there are also a tremendous number of
very important variables for endurance
and any kind of cardiovascular training
and there are a lot of excellent
resources out there about that I think
the most important one
in fact I will go on record saying what
I believe to be the most important
variable for any endurance or
cardiovascular training is that because
it's a repetitive movement that you are
able to complete the movement safely
meaning you're not putting your body in
to range of motion or into positions
that can damage joints or put you in any
kind of compromised State and some
people might think well that seems kind
of silly but if you've ever set the for
instance the seat too high on a
stationary bike and then done you know
airdyne or assault bike type interval
training Sprints if it's set too high
and you're over striding as it were the
next day you can really pay the price in
terms of some back pain or sciatica and
sometimes that pain can extend for for
quite a while so of course you don't
want to approach any exercise with so
much caution that it's neurotic and
preventive and yet you don't want to
approach any exercise in any way that's
so Cavalier forgive the pun Jeff that
you're also going to compromise your the
Integrity of your joints in musculature
and connective tissue let's talk about
some real world practical variables
for instance let's say you get a poor to
terrible night's sleep should you train
the next day or not well that really
depends I can honestly say I've had some
of the best training sessions resistance
training or endurance training sessions
after a really poor night's sleep but
that's the rare event more often than
not if I'm not sleeping well I've had a
terrible night's sleep the next day
I will just skip training that day I
know that will shock a number of you out
there or perhaps you're already calling
me names weak Etc but I find that if
I've slept really poorly or I've had a
very stressful event the day before and
I don't sleep well training the next day
sets me up for getting ill and getting
ill sets me up for not being able to
train for multiple days so it is my
preference in that case to skip a day
and really focus on recovery
and then as I mentioned earlier slide
that workout to the next day and rarely
double that workout up with another
workout but then just slide the schedule
forward by a day but I really try and
strive that is I really try to double up
at least some workouts later in the week
in that case so that I can get back on
schedule of starting the seven day
protocol again on the same day I don't
want to be excessively vague there what
I'm trying to say is I try and adhere to
the same schedule but if I get a poor
night sleep I'll just simply skip the
workout the next day
Slide the workout forward there is one
exception to that and it's an important
exception which is
there are times when I've not slept well
or I've had some particularly stressful
event the day before and haven't slept
well
but I'm able to do so-called nsdr
non-sleep depressed the next day so
there have been times when I've only got
three or four hours of sleep the night
before and I'm feeling it really behind
the ball the next morning but I really
want to get my workout in so instead
what I will do is a 10 but ideally in
that case a 30 or even 60 Minutes
non-sleep deep rest and there's a 10
minute non-sleep deep rest protocol
uh read by me but it is a non-spiritual
non-mystical
science supported non-sleep deep breast
protocol available on YouTube you can
simply put my name huberman put nsdr and
virtuesan virtu s-a-n
into YouTube and you'll find that script
there are other nsdr scripts that you
can find now on Spotify and on YouTube
and if you fall asleep during those
non-sleep deep rest scripts that's great
and if you don't you will also find that
it will restore your ability to perform
mental and physical work so there are
times when I haven't
gotten as much sleep as I would like or
I'm feeling a bit more stressed for
whatever reason and I'll do nsdr and
then I will go train
and that often Works fabulously well for
me and then I don't have to skip a
workout entirely just because I didn't
get a good night's sleep a lot of people
ask whether or not
you should train fasted or fed and this
is a very controversial area I
personally prefer to do my
cardiovascular work not having eaten
anything
in the previous
three to ten hours and typically that's
because I wake up and I'll do the
cardiovascular training within about an
hour of waking up
sometimes later because my first meal
generally Falls generally not always
falls around 11 A.M I don't do any kind
of formal intermittent fasting but
typically my meal schedule somewhere
between 11 A.M and my last bite of food
is around 8 PM but I'm not super strict
about that I might eat in you know as
late as 9 p.m and I might eat something
at 10 A.M if I wake up really hungry I
might have something before 11 A.M I'm
not neurotic about it but in terms of
training I like to train fasted and that
includes the resistance training
workouts and those come early in the day
for me and typically if I'm going to
train legs on Monday for instance which
is when I train legs I'll make sure that
the night before I'm ingesting some
starch some carbohydrate like rice or
pasta or something of that sort to make
sure that when I do that morning leg
workout I have enough glycogen in the
muscles Etc again nutrition is a
somewhat controversial area in fact it
can evoke very strong feelings because I
know we've got vegans and we've got
omnivores and we've got carnivores and
people who are keto this isn't really
the format for us to get into all of
that
I think the rule to follow is figure out
what optimizes your training for your
particular training goals for me that
most often means training fasted and
then eating pretty soon after I train
and if it's a high intensity resistance
training workout and frankly all of my
resistance training workouts are pretty
high intensity I'm not going to failure
on every set but at least say about 30
percent of those sets I'm going to
failure
the other sets I'm working very hard and
nonetheless well then I eat some
starches after I train and I also ingest
some protein in the form of a protein
drink or a meal that includes some
protein food but I don't like to eat
before I do resistance training or not
or at least not within the hour or two
before I do resistance training there
are exceptions to that and I should say
that the same basically applies to
endurance work if I'm going to head out
for a run typically I don't want my
belly full of food
or any food at all but
there are times where I wake up hungry
and I very much need to eat something or
I have something scheduled socially like
a breakfast and I'll have that breakfast
and then an hour or 90 minutes later
I'll do my workout because I want to
make sure that I finish the workout I
again am not neurotically attached to
training fasted or fed for me fasted is
preferred but if I have to train fed
better to train than to not train at all
we haven't talked so much about
flexibility yet but we did an entire
episode of The huberman Lab podcast on
flexibility and I encourage you to check
out that episode if you're interested in
increasing your flexibility but the
basic takeaway from that episode is that
if you look at what I like to call the
center of mass of the research that is
most of the studies and what the
conclusions of most of the quality
studies point to so not the exceptions
but the kind of general rules
that have been gleaned over time from
multiple Labs over multiple decades Etc
what you find is that static stretching
that is holding a stretch and in fact
exhaling and relaxing the midsection and
torso and
relaxing into the stretch as opposed to
staying full of air and tense but
mentally and physically relaxing into
the stretch but not stretching maximally
that is not extending as far as you
possibly can go but more like 60 percent
or even less and then holding those
static stretches
for anywhere from 30 to 60 seconds and
then repeating doing that two or three
times throughout the week for multiple
muscle groups so it could be for your
quadriceps could be for hamstrings for
your lats their protocols out there in
fact we have a newsletter that is
focused entirely on protocols for
flexibility and stretching you can find
that again by going hubermanlab.com you
don't even need to sign up for the
newsletter although we invite you to if
you like but you can simply go there
scroll down to the flexibility
newsletter and all the protocols are
there for each of the muscle groups Etc
but what I typically try and do is some
stretching in the evening because I
train in the morning as I'm perhaps
getting ready for bed or if the TV is on
which in our house doesn't typically uh
go on because we don't have a TV but of
course there are computers and you know
people are on their computers etc well
I'll try and do some stretching while I
do that I also have a standing desk so
during the day at work regardless of
whether or not I train that morning or
not or I'm going to train in the
afternoon I'll try and do some static
stretching for my hamstrings my quads my
lats my shoulders my back really doesn't
take much time and I really try to space
that out throughout the week which if
you look at the peer-reviewed research
matches well to what's known to be most
effective which are going to be short
repeated sessions ideally every day but
truth told I fail
categorically fail I was about to think
of whether or not I ever stretch every
day I failed to do it every day but I
get about three or so stretching
sessions in per week and again it's just
static hold trying to really relax into
the stretch now the relaxing to the
stretch is something
has been talked about in martial arts
circles and Pavel satsulin has an
excellent book on stretching we can
provide a link to that talks about this
has a lot to do with relaxation of the
nervous system and the way that the
nerves innervate muscles and allow for
stretch if you will also the way that
the tendons and ligaments are are
innervated by nerves the converse is
also true and here again this is a
principle that Pavel has put forth uh I
believe he calls it irradiation meaning
irradiating out or emanating out from a
source which is that while exhaling and
relaxing the Torso the midsection some
people call it the core
although some people don't like that
term
can facilitate relaxation and stretching
through a larger range of motion so too
can Contracting the core the midsection
or gripping very tightly with the fist
can facilitate muscular contraction
because of the way that the nervous
system heavily we can even say over
represents the Fists in the brain and so
how would you apply this to your overall
foundational Fitness protocol well it
turns out that let's say you're doing
a movement that involves one limb moving
and then the other let's say it's bicep
curls just for sake of example turns out
that you will actually be stronger in
moving that dumbbell with the arm that
happens to be moving if you grip the
handle very tightly
but also grip the handle of the opposite
dumbbell very tightly now that said in
between sets I encourage you to do the
opposite to try and completely relax in
between sets combine that with the
physiological PSI and then when the set
the next set commences employ that very
strong grip both again of the of the
weight that's moving in the in the way
that at that moment might be stationary
or in isometric position
so the nervous system of course is what
controls muscles and that operates in
both directions if you want to relax try
and use long exhales maybe even
physiological size and really
concentrate on mentally and physically
relaxing in particular your core and
your fists and if you want to generate
force and you want to move a heavy
barbell or dumbbell you want to do a
chin up with the maximal force that's
when you can employ the opposite which
would be to grip the bar or dumbbell Etc
very tightly and you want to contract
your core or even fill your body with
air as they say plug all the leaks Etc
so this gets into kind of form and
movement which is an extensive near
infinite a landscape of discussion again
that we don't have time to go into I
just want to mention those two nervous
system related tips because I suppose as
a neuroscientist they appeal to me
because they are grounded in fundamental
principles of how the nervous system
innervates muscle and I know that they
will benefit you the first time you use
them and every time speaking of grip and
nervous system and fitness and Longevity
Dr Peter attia who is a medical doctor
was a guest on the huberman Lab podcast
and provided an enormous wealth of
information on that podcast episode I
really encourage you to check it out
when you have time and of course has his
own spectacular podcast the drive with
Peter attia Peter Dr Atia I should say
often talks about certain movements or
exercises that you should perform not
just to improve your Fitness but also to
touch into or measure how fit you are
and how well you are progressing toward
a long lifespan and health span and one
of those includes the ability to hang
from a bar for a minute or longer and
there are a number of different
expectations that one can have of how
long they should be able to hang from a
bar depending on their age and their
Fitness level Etc please check out Dr
atia's podcast and his various social
media sites to get more information on
that but what I can tell you is that if
you're going to hang from a bar
and you want to hang from that bar as
long as possible which turns out to be a
interesting and important metric of your
health then gripping the bar very
tightly will actually help earlier we
talked about whether or not to train if
you're sleep deprived and how to recover
from what I would say is moderate sleep
deprivation by doing nsdr as opposed to
Total sleep deprivation link being up
all night or having a truly miserable
night which case I think you should just
skip training the next day and slide it
forward now a similar issue comes up
from time to time where people wonder
whether or not they should train or not
if they are sick and here there's all
sorts of crazy uh gym lore and Sport
specific lore for instance I used to
hear this when I ran cross country there
was this
adage that if the symptoms were from the
neck up you could still train that is if
you were really congested and you had a
headache you could still run whereas if
it was in your chest and in your lungs
you couldn't run I don't think there's
any data whatsoever to support whether
or not that's true or whether it's it's
not true
for myself and because my general goal
is to be training and fit over time but
also to include General Health in the
fitness equation that is to not be sick
or chronically sick and certainly not to
get other people sick
if I have a little tiny sniffle like I
think I might be getting sick even then
I'm a little cautious in the sense that
I'm not going to do my typical workout I
might stop it about 15 minutes earlier
and I would do that not by neglecting
any body parts or anything of that sort
if it's a weight training workout by by
simply reducing the total number of sets
I probably wouldn't do any sets to
failure if I did I might reduce the
total number or percentage of sets to
failure from about 30 percent of sets to
maybe closer to ten percent of sets
something like that and if it was
endurance work I might throttle back by
10 or 20 percent and I will shorten the
total duration of the workout and I
often find that because of the known
yes peer-reviewed known immune system
enhancing effects of exercise sometimes
that alone will allow me to avoid
getting sick but of course I'm also
careful to get home take a hot shower
not stress myself out if I can avoid
getting myself stressed out and focus on
sleep and SDR other forms of recovery
good nutrition Etc
if however I have a real sniffle a cold
I'm not feeling well or I think I might
be coming down with a flu I absolutely
do not train and I don't get back into
training of any kind until I'm
completely recovered so what I'm
basically saying is that no I don't
believe you should train if you're sick
and perhaps equally importantly when you
come back from a layoff of any kind
whether or not because of illness or for
whatever reason
I do believe that because your body is a
bit untrained it's not ideal to jump
right back into maximal training and to
take one maybe two weeks of ramping up
the to the full duration and intensity
of workouts that then I would continue
on going
for however many cycles I can complete
before I hit another
sickness or I hit another Gap in my
schedule due to family obligations or
other obligations Etc so we've covered a
lot of tools and protocols and variables
related to Fitness but we have by no
means covered all the available tools
and protocols and variables
before we wrap up I do want to emphasize
one tool it's a very easy in fact zero
cost very low time commitment tool and
this was one that was provided Again by
Dr Andy Galpin when he was on the
huberman Lab podcast and it's a tool
that there is excellent research to
support the effectiveness of
and that I do believe should come at the
end of every training session and that's
to do three to five minutes of
deliberately slow breathing it sounds so
simple three to five minutes of
deliberately slowed breathing so this
could be while you're in the shower or
when you arrive at your car you might
sit in your car quietly and do that if
you have time or maybe even while you're
driving
back to or on to your next destination
just to really slow down your breathing
to really look at the recovery period
that has to follow each training session
and of course during which the
adaptations the changes that make you
more fit than you were going into the
exercise occur
and that three to five minutes of
deliberately slowed breathing has been
shown in Andy's group and in related
experiments not exactly the same but
related experiments in our laboratory
and in other Laboratories to really
so-called downshift the nervous system
and really set you up for maximal
recovery
rapid recovery and allow you to lean
into the next training session with full
intensity when that training session
eventually arrives so it's a very simple
tool but a very potent tool for your
overall Fitness so thank you for joining
me for this discussion of what I'm
calling a foundational
I guess we could even get bold and call
it an optimal Fitness protocol although
the word optimal is a tricky one there's
no real optimal Fitness protocol and
today what I've really tried to focus on
is this foundational protocol because it
does allow you to check off
most if not all the boxes related to
strength endurance
hypertrophy
speed power
flexibility
it will also teach you how to regulate
your nervous system up and down that is
to ramp up and focus mind muscle link
Etc and then quickly calm down
physiological size three to five minute
decompress breathing at the end of
training Etc really even though I talked
about the protocol that I follow and
again that we will provide as a
newsletter at hubermanlab.com if you
want to look at it in more detail even
though we talked about it in the context
of what I do again I really want to
emphasize that this protocol and the
description of this protocol and all its
variables is really for you and for you
to tailor to your specific needs so
please take the protocol into
consideration but do not treat it as
holy treat it as a starting point from
which you can adapt it to your specific
Fitness needs if you're learning from
and are enjoying the huberman Lab
podcast please subscribe to our YouTube
channel that's a terrific zero cost way
to support us in addition please
subscribe to the huberman Lab podcast on
Spotify and apple and on both Spotify
and apple you also have the opportunity
to leave us up to a 5 star review if you
have questions for us or comments about
the information we've covered or
suggestions about future guests please
put those in the comments section on
YouTube we do read all the comments
please also check out the sponsors
mentioned at the beginning of today's
episode that's the best way to support
the huberman Lab podcast not so much
today but in many previous episodes of
The huberman Lab podcast we talk about
supplements while supplements aren't
necessary for everybody many people
derive tremendous benefit from them for
things like enhancing sleep and focus
and hormone optimization the huberman
Lab podcast has partnered with momentous
supplements if you'd like to see the
supplements of the huberman Lab podcast
has partnered with momentos on you can
go to live momentous spelled ous so live
momentous.com huberman and there you'll
see a number of the supplements that we
talk about regularly on the podcast I
should just mentioned that that catalog
of supplements is constantly being
updated as mentioned at the beginning of
today's episode the huberman Lab podcast
has now launched a premium channel that
premium channel will feature monthly
amas or ask me anythings where I answer
your questions in depth as well as other
premium resources if if you'd like to
subscribe to the premium channel you can
simply go to hubermanlab.com premium I
should mention that the proceeds from
the premium channel go to support the
standard huberman Lab podcast which will
continue to be released every Monday per
usual as well as supporting various
research projects done on humans to
create the sorts of tools for mental
health physical health and performance
that you hear about on the huberman Lab
podcast again it's hubermanlab.com
premium to subscribe it's ten dollars a
month or one hundred dollars per year if
you haven't already subscribed to our
zero cost newsletter we have what is
called the neural network newsletter you
can subscribe by going to
hubermanlab.com go to the menu and click
on newsletter those newsletters include
summaries of podcast episodes lists of
tools from the huberman Lab podcast and
if you'd like to see previous
newsletters we've released you can also
just go to hubermanlab.com click on
newsletter in the menu and you'll see
various downloadable PDFs if you want to
sign up for the newsletter we just asked
for your email we do not share your
email with anybody and again it's
completely zero cost if you're not
already fall following me on social
media it's hubermanlab on Twitter on
Facebook and on Instagram and at all
three of those places I cover topics and
subject matter that are sometimes
overlapping with the information covered
on the huberman Lab podcast but that's
often distinct from information on the
huberman Lab podcast again it's huberman
lab on all social media channels so
thank you for joining me today for our
discussion about building your optimal
toolkit for fitness and last but
certainly not least thank you for your
interest in science
thank you
[Music]